Add Elastic Line Load Benchmark (#7145)
geodynamics/aspect: benchmarks/elastic_line_load/doc/elastic_line_load.md

```{tags}
category:benchmark
feature:2d
feature:cartesian
feature:analytical-solution
feature:mesh-deformation
feature:visco-elastic-plastic
```

(sec:benchmarks:elastic-line-load)=
# 2D Elastic Line Loading Problem

*This section was contributed by Daniel Douglas, Cedric Thieulot, Prajakta Mohite and John Naliboff*

This example uses ASPECT to reproduce the modeling setup of {cite:t}`dase96`, which prescribes
a line "load" on the top of an elastic half-space. The analytic solution for $\sigma_{xx}$, $\sigma_{xy}$
and $\sigma_{yy}$ comes from Albert Flamant and assumes a homogeneous, isotropic elastic half-space. To
approximate this in ASPECT, we use the `Viscoelastic` material model with a high viscosity, a uniform shear
modulus, and a small time step. This approximates a homogeneous, isotropic elastic half-space because the
`Viscoelastic` material model defines deformation with a Maxwell rheology that combines the viscous part and
the elastic part of the deformation in serial such that:

```{math}

> \frac{1}{E} \frac{d \sigma}{dt} + \frac{\sigma}{\eta} = \frac{d \epsilon}{dt}

Reviewer: The viscoelastic material model actually does not include the Young's modulus (only the Shear modulus). @cedrict - Thoughts on how we should phrase this to be consistent with the viscoelasticity approximation?

Reviewer: With that said, the statement `By making the viscosity large, we approximate a purely elastic response` below is certainly still fundamentally correct.

Author: Assuming incompressibility (poissions_ratio = 0.5), then the shear modulus is youngs_modulus / 3, I'll update this in the equation

```

where $E$ is Young's modulus, $\eta$ is the viscosity, $\sigma$ is the stress, and $\epsilon$ is the strain.
When $E$ is very large, the first term goes to 0 and $\sigma$ is related to the time derivative of the strain.
If $\eta$ is very large, then the second term goes to 0, the time derivatives cancel out, and $\sigma$ is
related to $\epsilon$. By making the viscosity large, we approximate a purely elastic response. The model setup,
and the determination of the analytic solution is outlined below. While developing this benchmark, we also
investigated the effect of compressible elasticity, which had no effect on the solution. Additionally, since the
stress applied to the top boundary never changes, varying the shear modulus also had no effect on the solution.

> 

Reviewer 2: I feel that the figure of the book would be nice there, but before I ask you to add it, I started a discussion in the developers element channel about the use of copyrighted material.

> The analytic solution which describes the stresses within the domain are outlined by Davis and Selvadurai

Reviewer: I think it would be good to state that the analytical solution actually does not contain any material parameters (Young's / Shear modulus, Poisson's ratio, etc).

Author: Yes good point! I worked this into the .md

```{math}
\sigma_{xx} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 - \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{xy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[(\text{sin}^2(\theta_2) - \text{sin}^2(\theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{yy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 + \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

where $\theta_1$ is the angle from the right edge of the line load to the current point, and $\theta_2$ is the angle from the
left edge of the line load to the current point, and $p_0$ is the magnitude of the traction introduced by the load, in Pa. Within this
benchmark, the plugin `flamant_solution.cc` creates a postprocessor that visualizes the analytical solution onto the ASPECT grid for
direct comparison to the ASPECT stresses. In the three figures below, we compare the stresses output by ASPECT with the analytic
solution within a 150 \si \km $\times$ 150 \si \km subset of the domain, centered on the load. To quantify how well ASPECT reproduces the analytic
solution, we calculate a relative error with:

```{math}

> \chi = \text{abs}\left( \frac{\sigma_i^{analytic} - sigma_i^{ASPECT}}{\sigma_i^{analytic}} \right)

Reviewer 2: missing backslash in front of sigma

```

where $i$ = $xx$, $xy$, or $yy$ is a given stress component.

```{figure-md} fig:sigma-xx-error
<img src="sigma_xx_model_error.png" alt="The relative error for $\sigma_{xx}$"/>

The relative error for $\sigma_{xx}$.
```

```{figure-md} fig:sigma-xy-error
<img src="sigma_xy_model_error.png" alt="The relative error for $\sigma_{xy}$"/>

The relative error for $\sigma_{xy}$.
```

```{figure-md} fig:sigma-yy-error
<img src="sigma_yy_model_error.png" alt="The relative error for $\sigma_{yy}$"/>

The relative error for $\sigma_{yy}$.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: looking at the benchmark as a whole, I feel it'd be nice if there was a 2d paraview figure with the actual displacement field+arrows so that people can get a visual representation of the solution?

the elastic part of the deformation in serial such that:

```{math}
\frac{1}{E} \frac{d \sigma}{dt} + \frac{\sigma}{\eta} = \frac{d \epsilon}{dt}
```

where $E$ is Young's modulus, $\eta$ is the viscosity, $\sigma$ is the stress, and $\epsilon$ is the strain.
We do not define $E$ within ASPECT, but instead work with the shear modulus $G$ when using viscoelasticity.
$E$ is related to $G$ with:
```{math}
G = \frac{E}{2(1 + \nu)}
```
where $\nu$ is Poisson's ratio. For an incompressible material, which we assume is that case in this benchmark, $\nu$ = 0.5.
When $G$ is very large, the first term goes to 0 and $\sigma$ is related to the time derivative of the strain.
If $\eta$ is very large, then the second term goes to 0, the time derivatives cancel out, and $\sigma$ is
related to $\epsilon$. By making the viscosity large, we approximate a purely elastic response. The model setup,
and the determination of the analytical solution is outlined below. It is important to note that in the analytical solution for the stresses,
there is no dependence on the properties of the elastic material, only on the magnitude of the load and the distance of a given point from the load.

> While developing this benchmark, we also investigated the effect of compressible elasticity, which had no effect on the solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While developing this benchmark, we also investigated the effect of compressible equation of state, which had no effect on the solution.
```

The analytic solution which describes the stresses within the domain are outlined in Section 4.6 of {cite:t}`dase96`, but the expressions for each of the 3 independent components is:

```{math}
\sigma_{xx} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 - \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{xy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[(\text{sin}^2(\theta_2) - \text{sin}^2(\theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{yy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 + \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

where $\theta_1$ is the angle from the right edge of the line load to the current point, and $\theta_2$ is the angle from the
left edge of the line load to the current point, and $p_0$ is the magnitude of the traction introduced by the load, in Pa (see {numref}`fig:theta1-theta2-ref`). Within this
benchmark, the plugin `flamant_solution.cc` creates a postprocessor that visualizes the analytical solution onto the ASPECT grid for
direct comparison to the ASPECT stresses.

```{figure-md} fig:theta1-theta2-ref
<img src="dase96b.*" alt="Figure showing theta1 theta2"/>

> Figure from {cite:t}`dase96` showing how the analytic solution is computed using angles from the edges of the load, $\theta_1$ and %\theta_2$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figure from {cite:t}`dase96` showing how the analytic solution is computed using angles from the edges of the load, $\theta_1$ and $\theta_2$.
```

modulus, and a small time step. This approximates a homogeneous, isotropic elastic half-space because the
`Viscoelastic` material model defines deformation with a Maxwell rheology that combines the viscous part and
the elastic part of the deformation in serial such that:

```{math}
\frac{1}{E} \frac{d \sigma}{dt} + \frac{\sigma}{\eta} = \frac{d \epsilon}{dt}
```

where $E$ is Young's modulus, $\eta$ is the viscosity, $\sigma$ is the stress, and $\epsilon$ is the strain.
We do not define $E$ within ASPECT, but instead work with the shear modulus $G$ when using viscoelasticity.
$E$ is related to $G$ with:
```{math}
G = \frac{E}{2(1 + \nu)}
```
where $\nu$ is Poisson's ratio. For an incompressible material, which we assume is that case in this benchmark, $\nu$ = 0.5.
When $G$ is very large, the first term goes to 0 and $\sigma$ is related to the time derivative of the strain.
If $\eta$ is very large, then the second term goes to 0, the time derivatives cancel out, and $\sigma$ is
related to $\epsilon$. By making the viscosity large, we approximate a purely elastic response. The model setup,

> and the determination of the analytic solution is outlined below. It is important to note that in the analytic solution for the stresses,

Reviewer 2: analytical

there is no dependence on the properties of the elastic material, only on the magnitude of the load and the distance of a given point from the load.
While developing this benchmark, we also investigated the effect of compressible elasticity, which had no effect on the solution.
Additionally, since the stress applied to the top boundary never changes, varying the shear modulus has no effect on the solution.
This is consistent with the analytic solution, which is independent of material parameters, and is also intuitive when considering that

> the rheology of an elastic material is lienar. For the same applied traction, increasing the shear modulus then

Reviewer 2: linear

decreases the strain, while decreasing the shear modulus increases the strain.
By playing around with the input file in this benchmark, you can confirm that this is the case by seeing how the
velocity magnitude changes with different values of the shear modulus.

The analytic solution which describes the stresses within the domain are outlined by Davis and Selvadurai

> 1996 in Section 4.6, but the expressions for each of the 3 unique components is:

Reviewer 2: cite ref instead

Reviewer 2: remove 'unique' ?

```{math}
\sigma_{xx} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 - \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{xy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[(\text{sin}^2(\theta_2) - \text{sin}^2(\theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{yy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 + \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

where $\theta_1$ is the angle from the right edge of the line load to the current point, and $\theta_2$ is the angle from the
left edge of the line load to the current point, and $p_0$ is the magnitude of the traction introduced by the load, in Pa (see {numref}`fig:theta1-theta2-ref`). Within this
benchmark, the plugin `flamant_solution.cc` creates a postprocessor that visualizes the analytical solution onto the ASPECT grid for
direct comparison to the ASPECT stresses.

```{figure-md} fig:theta1-theta2-ref
<img src="dase96b.*" alt="Figure showing theta1 theta2"/>

> Figure from {cite:t}`dase96` showing how the analytic solution is computed using angles from the edges of the load, $\theta_1$ and %\theta_2$.

Reviewer 2: $ instead of %

```

ASPECT most accurately reproduces $\sigma_{yy}$, which is clearly visible in {numref}`fig:sigma-yy-error`.
Similarly, ASPECT accurately reproduces $\sigma_{xy}$ as well, the vertical line directly in the center of
{numref}`fig:sigma-xy-error` is a numerical artifact since the stress is 0 here, meaning that in our relative
error calculation we are dividing by 0. The highest deviation occurs for $\sigma_{xx}$, where the misfit increases
with depth, and is higher directly beneath the load ({numref}`fig:sigma-xx-error`). We can also visualize the stress
along the surface of the ASPECT model, as well as with depth directly beneath the center of the load ({numref}`fig:surface-depth-stresses`).
Along the surface, with the exception of the points at the left and right edges of the line load, there is good agreement
with the predicted stresses in ASPECT and with the analytic solution. The oscillations in the stresses at the edges of the
load are numerical artifacts introduced by the discontinuity in the traction at this point, from 0 to $p_0$. ASPECT also
predicts non-zero $\sigma_{xx}$ towards the edges of the model domain (top row of {numref}`fig:surface-depth-stresses`).

> With depth beneath the middle of the load, ASPECT accurately reproduces all of the stress components at depths $\leq$40 \km.

Reviewer 2: remove \ in front of km

At depths greater than 40 km, $\sigma_{xx}$ begins to noticeably deviate from the analytic solution, which is likely due to the
increasing proximity to the boundary conditions. The analytic solution assumes an infinite elastic half-space, but in this

> example we place a physical boundary at 300 \km depth.

Reviewer 2: remove \ before km

```{tags}
category:benchmark
feature:2d
feature:cartesian
feature:analytical-solution
feature:mesh-deformation
feature:visco-elastic-plastic
```

(sec:benchmarks:elastic-line-load)=

> # 2D Elastic Line Loading Problem

Reviewer: I think it would be good at some point in the cookbook documentation to discuss the governing and constitutive equations in ASPECT versus the analytical solution. I'm happy to help contribute some text here if that would be useful

*This section was contributed by Daniel Douglas, Cedric Thieulot, Prajakta Mohite and John Naliboff*

> This example uses ASPECT to reproduce the modeling setup of Davis and Selvadurai 1996, which prescribes

Reviewer 2: probably add an entry to bib file instead?
@book{dase96,
Author = {R.O. Davis and A.P.S. Selvadurai},
Publisher = {Cambridge University Press},
Title = {Elasticity and Geomechanics},
Year = {1996}}

and $\sigma_{yy}$ comes from Albert Flamant. The model setup, and the determination of the analytic
solution is outlined below.

The analytic solution which describes the stresses within the domain are outlined by Davis and Selvadurai
1996 in Section 4.6, but the expressions for each of the 3 unique components is:

```{math}
\sigma_{xx} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 - \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{xy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[(\text{sin}^2(\theta_2) - \text{sin}^2(\theta_1) ) \right]
```

```{math}
\sigma_{yy} = \frac{p_0}{\pi} \left[\theta_2 - \theta_1 + \frac{1}{2} \cdot (\text{sin}(2 \theta_2) - \text{sin}(2 \theta_1) ) \right]
```

where $\theta_1$ is the angle from the right edge of the line load to the current point, and $\theta_2$ is the angle from the
left edge of the line load to the current point, and $p_0$ is the magnitude of the traction introduced by the load, in Pa. Within this
benchmark, the plugin `flamant_solution.cc` creates a postprocessor that visualizes the analytic solution onto the ASPECT grid for

> direct comparison to the ASPECT stresses. In the three figures below, we compare the stresses output by ASPECT with the analytic

Reviewer 2: analytical?

> solution within a 150 km x 150 km subset of the domain, centered on the load. To quantify how well ASPECT reproduces the analytic

Reviewer 2: $150~\si{\km} \times 150~\si{\km}$

```

ASPECT most accurately reproduces $\sigma_{yy}$, which is clearly visible in {numref}`fig:sigma-yy-error`.
Similarly, ASPECT accurately reproduces $\sigma_{xy}$ as well, the vertical line directly in the center of
{numref}`fig:sigma-xy-error` is a numerical artifact since the stress is 0 here, meaning that in our relative
error calculation we are dividing by 0. The highest deviation occurs for $\sigma_{xx}$, where the misfit increases
with depth, and is higher directly beneath the load ({numref}`fig:sigma-xx-error`). We can also visualize the stress
along the surface of the ASPECT model, as well as with depth directly beneath the center of the load ({numref}`fig:surface-depth-stresses`).
Along the surface, with the exception of the points at the left and right edges of the line load, there is good agreement
with the predicted stresses in ASPECT and with the analytic solution. The oscillations in the stresses at the edges of the
load are numerical artifacts introduced by the discontinuity in the traction at this point, from 0 to $p_0$. ASPECT also
predicts non-zero $\sigma_{xx}$ towards the edges of the model domain (top row of {numref}`fig:surface-depth-stresses`).

> With depth beneath the middle of the load, ASPECT accurately reproduces all of the stress components at depths $\leq$40 km.

Reviewer 2: $40~\si{\km}$

At depths greater than 40 km, $\sigma_{xx}$ begins to noticeably deviate from the analytic solution, which is likely due to the
increasing proximity to the boundary conditions. The analytic solution assumes an infinite elastic half-space, but in this

> example we place a physical boundary at 300 km depth.

Reviewer 2: $300~\si{\km}$
